[MUSIC]
>> J. Husain: Now here's where we get
to a place where I want to talk about
exceptions to rules,
because every rule has an exception.
And so one of the exceptions to rules here
is that sometimes you want to trigger side
effects, right,
when somebody subscribes to an observable.
Now in general that's going to happen, for
example, when we make a network request.
So side effects happen sometimes when
you subscribe to an observerable.
Again, you want to delay them.
You don't want to do the side effects
when you create the observable,
you only want to do the side effects when
somebody forEach's over the observable.
So you want to make sure
that the observable is lazy.
Now let's take a look at the getJSON
request we made, that actually,
notice that that triggers side effects.
As soon as you forEach over that
observable, right, what happens?
Well I'll just use the network request,
and sure enough,
that change is a global object.
So it's not that you
can't have side effects,
it's that ideally you want to encapsulate
them inside of the observable.
So that when somebody forEach's
over that observable, then and
only then do you trigger the side effects.
So what would be nice is, and then
instead in addition to doing this inside
of the forEach, we can also use
an operator called do action.
Now what do action does is it makes sure
that when you forEach over an observable,
it injects some code that you can
run to cause side effects to occur.
Does that makes sense?
So if I forEach over an array,
there's no side effects, right?
They're not really changing
any global objects.
But with do action,
I can cause a side effect to occur.
So I was saying earlier,
sometimes we wanna inject side effects
inside of an observable when
we forEach into it, right?
So we wanna cause a side effect to occur
just by forEaching over an observable.
So we already saw that happen with
making a network request, right?
That's what happens when you
forEach over a network request or
the observable that comes
back from search Wikipedia.
We end up triggering a side effect,
somebody selecting all the text now, or
at least on my screen.
Interesting, but
it's not showing up there.
>> Speaker 2: [INAUDIBLE]
Type in there.
>> J. Husain: You know what?
They are selecting,
it's just super faint on the projection.
But someone selected.
>> J. Husain: Someone
selected all the text.
[LAUGH] Yeah.
It's happening.
>> Speaker 3: The text is not clear.
>> J. Husain: Whoever out there is
selecting all the text,
do not select all the text.
[LAUGH] Pink is nice, but.
>> Speaker 3: Yeah, I guess.
I guess we're gonna
have to roll with pink.
>> J. Husain: This is the My Little Pony
theme of text editing.
>> Speaker 3: Yeah, but
the problem is there's more
than one user in pink.
So we can't pinpoint which one.
>> J. Husain: It seems to have unselected.
Thank you, whoever you are out there.
>> J. Husain: So
we've learned about map, filter,
merge all, zip, and reduce.
We've learned about flattening patterns,
so
we've learned how to build
a collection function,
which is that you keep mapping until you
have all the data you need in scope.
You create your result, and then you
figure out how many flattens you need, and
where to apply those flattens,
to get down to a nice flat collection.
And then use forEach to consume it.
That's just the functional programming
style of building collections.
Now you learn that when we start working
with observable we have an additional
question to ask ourselves.
Which is then that, in that last
step when we do the flattening,
the question is which flatten to use.
Do we use merge all, do we use concat all,
or do we use switch latest, right?
Now another thing about observables,
that you don't have with arrays, is
that when you forEach over an observable
it may cause something to happen, right?
It may actually cause
a side effect to occur.
So that's the case with the observable
that we get back from search Wikipedia,
when we forEach other that.
We actually trigger a network
request that goes across the wire.
So that can be something that we can use
to our advantage in this particular case.
So search button clicks.
Remember the problem we had, we said that
which is that we were relying on the order
in which those event handlers fired,
right?
Maybe this event handler fires first and
then we display, or perhaps even
create those DOM elements, and
then later on this event handler process,
but we can't be 100% certain of that.
So if we want to inject side effects,
meaning when you forEach over
an observable, something happens we can
use the doAction function.
>> J. Husain: So
the doAction function actually
has the same API as forEach,
the only difference is it
returns an observable.
So if you put doAction in here,
this is technically the action to
occur when you get an onNext,
so you can take the value.
And in here we can do something.
So in here we actually wanna
take the side effect and
put it right in here, so that whenever
you onNext over SearchButtonClicks,
it injects the side effect.
Now what I have done here, cuz I've
actually just created another observable.
I haven't,
not like forEach where we run something.
What we're doing is we're just saying when
somebody calls forEach on this observable,
do this action.
So this is gonna return yet
another observerable, which I'm just gonna
alias to the exact same one as before.
Well, actually it's
better practice to sit.
Let's let's say, it's always better to
be semantic when you're naming things.
So we've gone from SearchButtonClicks to
SearchFormOpened, or SearchFormOpens.
I usually name my observables plural
because there are streams of things for
the same reason you wouldn't name
arrays plural because they're
collections of things.
So I'm gonna call this searchFormOpens.
And now I now,
when we onNext searchFormOpens,
that form has already been displayed.
Does that make sense?
Because, this is the code that gets
injected in when you call forEach.
So now we can be sure that by the time
this code runs, this code has already run.
Cuz when we forEach over this,
the first thing that happens is that this
occurs.
>> J. Husain: So let's just confirm that
this still works.
>> J. Husain: Hopefully, no because
I'm not listing the searchFormOpens here,
I'm listing to searchButtonClicks.
So now that I've switched it
to listen to searchFormOpens,
We should see that it works.
>> J. Husain: Great.
And if I type in ab,
we get my search results.
Great.
Now we wanna do the same
thing with close clicks.
Right?
When you click close,
we actually wanna hide this form.
And so this is a lot of us to just inject
some side effects into the close clicks
observable such that when somebody
clicks close we can be sure that we're
gonna hide that form before we get any
feedback when you for Each over that.
So here inside of close clicks we
created close clicks make this smaller,
and we're going to create
a search form closes and
that's going to take close clicks and
add a do action.
That just means we're going
to do something when for
each is called, and
in this particular case you're
just going to take this and
hide it again [SOUND] And
so now instead of taking
until close clicks.
We're going to do a take
until search form closes.
Yeah question?
>> Speaker 3: It's asking what [INAUDIBLE]
[SOUND] is asynchronous?
>> J. Husain: If the side effect
is asynchronous,
you can't do with do action.
Do action is only synchronous, but what
he's really saying, I think in effect,
is what if you want to perform that
side effect after an asynchronous
operation occurs, and then what you would
really need to do is you need to use map
because you want to map And then create
an observable that causes the asynchronous
thing to occur and then do a do action
on the inner observable, right.
What he's saying is I want
to do a asynchronous action
when item arrives through the stream.
So then you would just map over
just like we cause an asynchronous
request to occur when we type a key,
we will take an observable and
win it on nexus, well out a map and And
then we'll create an observable to
represent that asynchronous action.
And then on that inner observable,
that represents the asynchronous action,
that's where we add do action and
then at that point we know that the
asynchronous action is completed and so
that we can now synchronously
cause of side effect to occur.
Almost every side effect in
a browser is a synchronous API.
Because when you work with a dom.
It's all sync APIs for
changing the dom, right?
Remove child, append child.
So if that's what you want to do.
If you want to wait until some
asynchronous event occurs.
And then cause a side effect to do it.
You would just map,
return that observable.
And then a do action on
that inner observable.
Does that make sense?
So now we make sure that everything
executes in the correct order,
anytime we want we can inject side
effects into an observable, right?
Because remember that observable
is just a forEach method, and
it's just like tacking on some code inside
of that forEach path which you want to run
at the top of the forEach method.
Think of that as the mental model for
what doAction does.
And doAction also has overloads,
by the way.
If you wanna do a side effect on onError,
or
onComplete, you just pass it, it's got
the exact same interface as forEach.
So you can just do something
when an error occurs, or
do something when a completion occurs.
In this case, we don't need to do that.
Does that makes sense?
So it has the same interfaces for each.
So you can just cause some side effect to
occur if an error happens to come through
the observable or when a completion
happens to go through the observable.
So that wasn't clear,
I'll put that up one more time.
Just the same interfaces forEach.
So doAction,
it's exactly the same as forEach,
except forEach actually triggers
the observable to do something.
Whereas doAction just returns another
observable that when forEached,
will cause those actions to occur.
So one of these is a lazy,
doAction is lazy, right?
We're not we're not doing anything yet.
We're just creating an observable
that when you forEach over it,
something will happen.
And forEach is eager.
By the time you call forEach,
you're actually now doing something.
Does that make sense?
So any time you want a UI action to occur,
whenever somebody forEaches over
a stream or an event occurs, right,
it's usually best to
stick that in a doAction.
And just some side effect
that's occurring alongside.
So you see here that if we run this it
should work.
>> J. Husain: Great.
Now how do I know that if I close this,
it's gone.
But how do I know it's actually
unsubscribed from the event handler?
Let's try something out.
Let's try not hiding it onClose,
let's comment out this close here.
And let's run it again.
And then so
now we know it won't be hidden.
But if everything worked correctly,
if I type into the text box
after clicking Close, I shouldn't
see anymore search results go out.
Because we've stopped listening to
the inner stream of search results sets
the moment we were only within that
stream until the close button is clicked.
So now that I've clicked Close,
right, hopefully.
Nothing.
So that's how you clean up after
yourself when you close and
open sections of the user interface.
You always think about in terms of
there's some of that which causes
this form to open, and there's some of
that which causes this form to close.
And so just like sequencing any action
with observable, you take the thing
you want to happen first, you map, and you
return the thing you want to have second.
And then that gives you
a two-dimensional observable because for
every item in the stream that
you want to happen first,
you're substituting in an observable for
each one of those items.
Then you have to pick the right
flattening strategy, right?
That's the question you have to ask
yourself when you work with observable,
but not with array.
With array it's just how deep am I?
Well then I know to apply
that may concatAlls.
But with observable,
it's how deep am I, right?
And which flattening strategies
do I apply at each step
to get the right concurrency
pattern that I want?
So now we've explained merge all,
switch latest, and
concatAll by visualizing them to hopefully
try and capture of that mental picture and
project that mental pictures
as you're going through.
And solving this problem to trying
to decide behavior you want.
Because there are cases in the UI for
all of these things.
You'll find cases for merge all,
you'll find cases for ConcatAll, but for
the most part, you'll find cases for
switch latest.
You'll only want to do the latest thing.
So I'm gonna uncomment closeClicks,
and now we've built something that's
very much akin to the type of thing that
you're gonna build in user interfaces.
This is how you will build
your user interfaces.
Someone will open a form, you'll have
some asynchronous action occurring while
that form is open, and
then if somebody closes that form,
you'll want to completely
clean up after yourself.
And this is exactly
the pattern that you use.
I'm gonna fork this so
people can come back and refer to it.
So search.
No search results, that no surprise.